The game opens with one of three lifepaths for the player character V—Nomad, Streetkid, or Corpo—each leading to a partnership with street thug Jackie Welles and netrunner T-Bug as mercenaries in Night City.

In 2077, fixer Dex DeShawn hires V and Jackie to steal a biochip called "the Relic" from the Arasaka Corporation. The job collapses when they witness Yorinobu Arasaka murdering his father, Saburo, and framing it as poisoning. During their escape, T-Bug is killed, Jackie is mortally wounded, and the Relic's case is damaged, forcing V to slot the chip. Dex, angered by the fallout, shoots V and leaves them for dead.

V awakens in a landfill, haunted by the digital ghost of rocker-turned-terrorist Johnny Silverhand, who in 2023 carried out an attack on Arasaka Tower with Rogue Amendiares, a Fixer in the present day, and other mercenaries. Johnny perished in the attack with V seeing his memories of the event. V is then rescued by Saburo's loyal bodyguard, Goro Takemura, who suspects the truth and wishes to use V as proof that Yorinobu killed Saburo. Ripperdoc Viktor Vector reveals the biochip's resurrection nanotech is overwriting V's mind with Johnny's engram, leaving only weeks to find a cure. Johnny, initially antagonistic, resolves to help V while also utilizing the opportunity to try and take down Arasaka again.

Teaming with Takemura, V pursues two leads: capturing Arasaka scientist Anders Hellman with the help of nomad Panam Palmer and the Aldecaldos clan, and rescuing Evelyn Parker, who commissioned the heist. Hellman is caught but is unable to help V, and later given up to Takemura. With aid from Evelyn's friend Judy Álvarez, V learns Evelyn was hacked and sold to "Scavs", a group known for kidnapping and harvesting cybernetics from people. Evelyn was abused by her kidnappers and later dies by suicide. Using Evelyn's braindance memories, V discovers she learned of the Relic from the Voodoo Boys; a gang of very private netrunners, who wanted Johnny's engram to reach beyond the Blackwall; a firewall that protects the internet and world from rogue AIs.

Through them, V relives Johnny's past. In 2013, Johnny's girlfriend Alt Cunningham created Soulkiller, an AI that transfers minds into cyberspace but destroys the brain. Arasaka used Soulkiller on Alt, imprisoning her in their digital fortress, Mikoshi. Johnny's later nuclear attack freed her, allowing her to escape past into the Blackwall, to become an AI, but ended with his own capture and upload via Soulkiller. Arasaka's "Secure Your Soul" program and the Relic stem from this technology. V communicates with Alt's consciousness beyond the Blackwall and strikes a deal: if V grants her access to Arasaka's subnet and Mikoshi, she can separate V and Johnny.

Separately, Takemura has resolved to take his information to the Arasaka executives and to this end, V and him capture Hanako Arasaka, Yorinobu's sister, to prove his guilt, but V is forced to flee after Arasaka soldiers attack. Following the ambush, Hanako reaches out to V and offers to help them in exchange for their assistance in ousting Yorinobu, which Johnny greatly opposes.

In the final act, V must choose to either assault Arasaka Tower or accept Hanako's offer. The attack can be carried out solo, with Rogue (Johnny takes control of V's body in this scenario), or with the Aldecaldos. Alternatively, siding with Hanako successfully ousts Yorinobu and sees Arasaka remove and destroy the Relic. All paths involve V defeating Adam Smasher. Regardless, due to the engram's prolonged presence in V's body, the biochip's effects are irreversible. The results leave V with a shorter lifespan in their own body but could offer Johnny a full life, as the Relic has tailored the body for him. Depending on the player's choice, V either uploads their own engram to Mikoshi awaiting a new body, lives on in their current body with a shortened lifespan while seeking means to undo the damage, or permanently surrenders their body to Johnny and leaves beyond the Blackwall with Alt—in the latter ending, which is not accessible if V accepts Hanako's offer, Johnny leaves Night City to start anew.